doc: add documentation describing CI internals (#394)
nim-works/nimskull: doc/ci.rst

======================
Continuous Integration
======================

.. default-role:: code
.. include:: rstcommon.rst

.. contents::

This document aims to be a comprehensive guide to using and developing the
Continuation Integration (CI) system employed by |NimSkull|.

Troubleshooting failures
========================

Failing tests
-------------

While "Run tester" log will give you the full detail on the test run, it can be
very hard to find the failing test in the jungle of passing tests, so there are
several integrations built into CI to make this easier:

> * Annotations are generated for test failures:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Annotations (a GitHub feature) are generated for test failures:
```

On the phone and I can recall link syntax but worth linking to a GH help page.

  * If you are adding new tests in your PR, failure in any of them will be
    annotated and you can find them directly in the "Files changed" view of the
    PR

* All test failures are isolated and printed in "Print all test errors" step.
  By default Github Actions collapse this step so you'll have to expand it.

"There are differences when building from source archive compared to building from git"
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> There are several reasons for why this happens:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a build reproducibility test failure, comparing a builds from a git clone vs source archive -- yes, these can differ. See more on reproducible builds here (insert link).

There are several reasons for why this happens:
```

It's a bit over explaining but reproducible builds tests aren't a common thing and people might need a "slow down, here is what it means", before trying to fix it.

Not a hard suggestion, I'm just recommending it.

* The compiler is using information only available when building directly from
  git, and the source archive generation routine is not updated to include this
  information in the archive and/or the compiler build is not coded to use the
  stored information.

> * A cosmic ray hit the CI test system and make it generate slightly different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A cosmic ray hit the CI test system and made it generate a slightly different
```

  binary from the same source code. A re-run should clear the error in this case.

> To get more details on the error, open the failing workflow run and go to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get more details about the error, open the failing workflow run and go to
```

"Summary". Scroll down to the "Artifacts" section and look for one named

> "differences between binary from source archive and git". This contains HTML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"differences between binary from source archive and git". This contains an HTML
```

report generated by ``diffoscope`` about the differences.

If you need more information, the binaries that were compared can be found in
the following artifacts:

* "binaries from source archive"

* "release binaries"

Reproducibility test failures
-----------------------------

> PRs to be merged are tested to make sure that the compiler build remains

Reviewer: Ah, you covered it here, different kind of reproducibility though.

> deterministic with regards to the environment. For more information, see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deterministic with regards to the environment. To learn more about why reproducible builds matter and the concepts, see
```

Something like that helps indicate that it's general knowledge and not specific to us. This is not a hard suggestion.

the `Reproducible builds project <https://reproducible-builds.org/>`_.

> When tests of this category fails, the culprit usually are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When tests of this category fail, the culprit usually is:
```

> When tests of this category fail, the culprit usually is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When tests of this category fail, the culprit usually are:
```

My restructured text formating reading skills are rusty, but I believe there are two items in the list that follows.

> * Your changes introduces undeterministic variables like the current

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Your changes introduces nondeterministic variables like the current
```

  date/current time.

* If you are writing packaging code, it should be aware that file system

>   ordering is undeterministic and files must be ordered in memory before they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ordering is nondeterministic and files must be ordered in memory before they
```

  are added to archives.

While there are generated text diff, there is no highlighting and can be hard

> to read when the differences are large. To help with this, companion HTML

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Text diffs are generated, but there is no highlighting and they can be hard
to read when the differences are large. To help with this, companion HTML
```

reports are also generated and can be downloaded from Github Artifacts.

To access the HTML report, open the failing test run and go to "Summary".
The reports are saved in artifacts with suffix "reproducibility test diffoscope
output".

Lifecycle of an approved PR
===========================

> The only way to get code to |NimSkull|'s development branch is via PRs, and CI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only way to get code into |NimSkull|'s development branch is via PRs, and CI
```

was developed to leverage this.

1. PR is staged for merging.

> 2. The PR enters the merge queue and is merged to a staging branch. Multiple

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The PR enters the merge queue and is merged to a ``staging`` branch. Multiple
```

   PRs might be staged in this period to increase efficiency.

3. The testing pipelines test the code, generate binaries and render
   documentation.

4. Assuming that the staging branch passes all tests, `devel` is fast-forwarded

>    to staging head commit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Assuming that the ``staging`` branch passes all tests, ``devel`` is
   fast-forwarded to the ``staging`` head commit.
```

> 5. The "Publish" pipeline is run and deploy the rendered documentation and binaries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The "Publish" pipeline deploys the rendered documentation and binaries
```

   generated by the testing pipeline earlier in the staging branch.

Assumptions in CI design
------------------------

> With this lifecycle, CI make a few assumptions on the code state:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This lifecycle has a number of useful properties which we use in our approach to CI as follows:
```

* Code entering ``devel`` must have passed through ``staging``, and that

>   ``staging`` will become new ``devel``:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ``staging`` will become the new ``devel``:
```

>   * This allows us to run crucial evaluations task on ``staging`` only, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * This allows us to run crucial evaluation tasks on ``staging`` only, and
```

    when that passes and ``devel`` is fast-forwarded to ``staging``, we can
    access prior runs and obtain build results.

> * Only "light" tests has to be run on PRs to help developers debug their code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Only "light" tests have to be run on PRs to help developers debug their code
```

  before it is reviewed by a human. More time-consuming tests that are not
  likely to fail can be run later when the PR enters ``staging``.

Pipelines
=========

> This section provides an in-depth view on the design of each pipeline and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes the design of each pipeline and the
```

dependencies between them.

"Build and test"
----------------

Goals
.....

> * Verify that the compiler, tooling and standard library test suite passes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Verify that the compiler, tools, and standard library test suites pass
```

* Verify that the compiler can be bootstrapped with ORC. Whether this compiler
  is fully functional is not tested at the moment.

> * Verify that a source archive could be built.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Verify that a source archive was built.
```

Author: Wouldn't "was built" means that it was built earlier by something else and not checking if it can be built successfully?

Reviewer: Yes, my reading of this doc this far gave the impression that that's what happened.

If that's not the case then I believe "can be" would be more appropriate.

>   * Whether building the compiler and tools from the source archive works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Compiler and tools built from the source archive work.
```

>   * Whether the result of building from the source archive is identical to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Building from source archive is identical to
```

>     building from the git clone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    building from a git clone.
```

> * Render HTML documentation for uploading to Github Pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Render HTML documentation for upload to Github Pages.
```

* Build release binaries.

API
...

This pipeline handles all the building work, but it does not handle the task

> of publishing its generated data. That part is handled by the "Publish"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of publishing it's generated data. That part is handled by the "Publish"
```

pipeline.

> To support that, this pipeline exports the build result as Github Artifacts,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support publishing, this pipeline exports the build result as Github Artifacts,
```

> and these are the artifacts meant for consumption by other pipelines:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which are used by other pipelines, these artifacts are:
```

> * "release manifest tool": This artifact contains a built copy of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* "release manifest tool": contains a built copy of
```

  ``tools/release_manifest.nim`` for Linux.

> * "release binaries": Binaries built via ``koch unixrelease`` and their JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* "release binaries": built via ``koch unixrelease`` and their JSON
```

  metadata. These binaries are built straight from the git clone.

> * "source archive": The source archive generated from the git clone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* "source archive": generated from the git clone.
```

* "Generated docs": HTML documentation generated from source. This is the
  ``doc/html`` folder after a ``koch docs`` run.

Changes to how these artifacts are packaged must be reviewed carefully to
ensure that dependent pipelines will still function.

This pipeline also makes use of multiple jobs, which can make tracking its
success status hard. To that end, an "All check passed" check is provided
that will reflect the final status of the pipeline. Currently this is used
for integration with other tools that rely on Github Checks status.

Job dependency graph and internal API
.....................................

> In order to maximize throughput, steps are splitted into multiple dependent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to maximize throughput, steps are split into multiple dependent
```

jobs. This allows for:

> * Unrelated steps can be executed in parallel on multiple VMs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Unrelated steps to execute in parallel on multiple VMs.
```

> * Unrelated steps to be executed in parallel on multiple VMs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Unrelated steps can be executed in parallel on multiple VMs.
```

* Quick turn-around time for test runs without waiting for packaging to finish.

Github Actions UI provides an overall look into the dependency graph which can
be seen from "Summary" page of any "Build and test" `workflow run
<https://github.com/nim-works/nimskull/actions/workflows/ci.yml>`_.

In addition to the public API, there are several internal APIs used for sharing
data between jobs in this pipeline:

* "Download compiler" and "Upload compiler" actions: These can be found in
  ``.github/actions/download-compiler`` and ``.github/actions/upload-compiler``

>   respectively. These actions allow a job to upload its workspace, that is, all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  respectively. These actions allow a job to upload its workspace, all
```

  files changed/generated compared to the git source code, and allow that to be
  downloaded by dependent jobs.

  This is used to replicate the "workspace with binaries" across parallel jobs

>   so that they can be run independently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  so they run independently.
```

> * "binaries from source archive": This contains binaries built from the source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* "binaries from source archive": Contains binaries built from the source
```

  archive generated from the git clone. This is generated by
  ``source_binaries`` job and will be compared to a similar artifact
  generated by the ``package`` job.

  For the comparison to succeed, it's crucial that the packaging code is
  the same between ``source_binaries`` and ``package``.

> * ``pre_run`` outputs: The ``pre_run`` job provides a lot of data that dictates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``pre_run`` outputs: The ``pre_run`` job provides data that dictates
```

  how CI will be run:

  * ``skipped``: Whether a run should be skipped.

  * ``matrix``: The target matrix shared between jobs.

"Test compiler build reproducibility"
-------------------------------------

This pipeline verifies that the compiler can be deterministically built. See
the `Reproducible builds project <https://reproducible-builds.org/>`_ for more

> information on the testing criterias.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
information on the testing criteria.
```

This pipeline has a rather long runtime, and rarely fails, so it is only run

> once a PR enters staging.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
once a PR enters ``staging``.
```

This pipeline is developed with a rather standard matrix and does not perform
any data sharing. Working with this pipeline only requires understanding on
the `reprotest <https://pypi.org/project/reprotest/>`_ tool.

"Publish"
---------

> This pipeline is used to publish build results from prior run of the "Build and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Publishes build results from the prior run of the "Build and
```

test" pipeline on ``staging`` branch. Changes to the public API of "Build and
test" must be tested against "Publish".

This pipeline will perform pushes to the repository, so a lot of care must be

> put into the way it's action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
put into any changes to it.
```

> Only one instance of this pipeline might be run at any given time, due to its

Reviewer: This should be combined with the above as I believe this is the key thing to be careful about

mutating nature.

Development guidelines
======================

General
-------

* Each CI VM is weak, so prioritize parallelization by dividing the work into
  multiple independent jobs that can be executed by multiple VMs.

* Avoid repeated runs by extracting as many build results from other
  pipelines/jobs as possible: CI concurrency is limited, so running less is
  preferable.

* Steps and errors should be as descriptive as possible: Developers must
  understand how testing is done in order to debug their code.

* Make jobs that provide highly relevant statuses run as early as possible, for
  example, tests should be run as soon as it can be done. Developers are more

>   interested in things like test suite runs rather than whether a source archive

Reviewer: Simmering more to the affect of

```suggestion
  If the tests don't pass reproducibility is a moot point
```

  could be generated successfully.

* Pipelines that generate release artifacts should use pinned dependencies and

>   pinned OS. This avoid breakage due to random differences in software version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  OS. This avoid breakage due to random differences in software version.
```

Github Actions
--------------

> * Prefer using a version tag if possible. This makes sure that errorneous updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Prefer using a version tag. This makes sure that errorneous updates
```

  to an action will not cause our CI to fail.

Tools
=====

This section documents some of the tools created for use by CI.

Github Actions Problem Matcher
------------------------------

A `problem matcher
<https://github.com/actions/toolkit/blob/main/docs/problem-matchers.md>`_ for
|NimSkull| code is provided at ``.github/nim-problem-matcher.json``.

This can be loaded into a job with

.. code-block::
   echo "::add-matcher::.github/nim-problem-matcher.json"

> and will convert all messages generated by the Nim compiler into annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and will convert all messages generated by the |Nimskull| compiler into annotations.
```

Print all failed testament results
----------------------------------

``tools/ci_testresults.nim`` can be used to print only test failures from a
testament run.

Use this after a failed testament run to provide developers with a dedicated
view of all test failures.

It is also integrated with Github Actions to generate file annotations for
failed tests.

Release manifest tool
---------------------

Located at ``tools/release_manifest.nim``, this tool can be used to compose a
release manifest or to query it. This tool can be run on developer machine and

> have rather comprehensive built-in documentation, please refer to that for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
has rather comprehensive built-in documentation, please refer to that for
```
